---
title: On Luck
author: LQR471814
date: 2021-02-01
categories:
- on...
tags:
- philosophy
---

I have heard a lot of people refer to luck as a resource. Sayings
like "I've just used up all my luck for the next decade" are
commonly used after getting particularly lucky once.

Well we know luck doesn't actually exist, so is there actually any
substance behind the statement? Well, yes, what it's actually
saying in more formal terms is "well that won't happen again".

Brought into the context of probability, the probability of being
in a world where an improbable event happens twice is way smaller
than a world where it only happens once. Adding on more and more
improbable events makes the probability of being a world where
they all happen smaller and smaller.

In that sense, it makes sense to liken luck as a resource, one
where your luck diminishes as lucky things happen to you. (since
lucky things are inherently improbable)

Now this can be generalized to apply to many statements. Life
advice like "what goes up must come down" and "avoid extremes" can
all be explained with the same argument.

- "What goes up must come down."
    - It's extremely improbable for good things to always come to
      you.
- "Avoid extremes."
    - An "extreme" action is always more specific than a
      "non-extreme" action, so there are more worlds where a
      "non-extreme" action would be the correct course of action
      to achieve a desired result.
- "Those who exalt themselves will be lowered, those who lower
  themselves will be exalted."
    - Everyone gets a turn at the table, it's unlikely for someone
      to be exalted forever and it's unlikely for someone to be
      lowered forever.

In fact we can generalize this further, by saying that the
foundation of every life lesson that critiques people's ability to
predict the future is the fact that people suck at predicting the
future. (Which is kind of obvious)
