---
title: On Truth
author: LQR471814
date: 2025-05-20
categories:
- on...
tags:
- philosophy
---

I think "truth" as a philosophical concept has been abused for far
too long to create fallacious and contradictory arguments.

You, as the philosopher, the thinker can define "truth" as the
claim (or claims) from which the infinite set of all other claims
derive, any falsehood is a claim that is contradicted or falsified
by said truth.

Just like, you the philosopher can define "God" or a "supreme
being" as the un-caused first cause, the thing that causes
everything else to exist, but is not dependent on anything else to
exist.

The problem is bridging the gap between this definition with the
practical, the everyday truths and practicalities.

As a philosopher, how do you know that any claim is the "ultimate"
truth, that is does not derive from some greater truth or that it
will always hold true? For long it had been believed that the
earth was the center of the universe before it was proved
completely and utterly false for a more convincing and believable
model. For long it was considered unthinkable that Jesus would not
be God's son but as seen with the vast swaths of Muslims,
Atheists, Buddhists, Hindus, etc... in the world today, it is now
more thinkable and less certain than ever. For long it was
believed that the human mind was separate from the world, that the
human mind could not be controlled or affected in any way, this
was proved highly inaccurate in the modern world with the advent
of LSD.

Similarly in the ontological argument, how can you know that this
philosophical "supreme being" is necessarily the God in the bible,
or any specific God with specific characteristics at all? Even
though a "supreme being" can exist logically, it does not
necessarily entail that said supreme being is omni-benevolent or
intelligent at all. The argument also hinges on the vague idea of
"greatness" which can vary based on what ideological assumptions
you follow. For example, in math, the idea of "greatness" has
nothing to do with morality or humans.

From what we can see from the progression of history, the
questioning of our assumptions, and the rigorous methods of
knowledge acquisition we have developed (known as science), it is
highly probable that all knowledge is in fact theory, some
theories more credible than others due to corroborating evidence
and other established theories, but theories nonetheless.

It is extremely probable that the idea of "truth" exists as a
spectrum and not as a dichotomy. There are claims that are more
"truthful" than others, with the evaluation of the "truthfulness"
of a claim depending on its coherence with other truthful
statements which each have their own justifications, etc...

For example, the claim "the sky is blue" coheres with the color of
the sky and the color of other objects that are considered "blue",
that giant expanse you see when you look up unobstructed by a roof
coheres with the thing other people call the "sky" (in
conversation, in stories, in media, etc...), when you watch videos
of people "skydiving", you see people falling out of the giant
expanse others call the "sky" which is usually the color "blue"
further cementing the coherence of the statement in your mind
until it becomes fact, and truth.

Now more specific statements are usually less controversial so it
would probably be better to restate that statement to "the sky is
usually blue" or "the sky is blue during the day" but regardless,
the "truthiness" of a statement depends on its coherence with
other information and statements you have access to. "Evidence"
for a statement is really just additional information that is
   coherent with the statement given. "Experiments" are really
   just ways to gather additional information (especially
   information that, when known, may reduce the coherency of a
   statement).

You can also see this with my own justification for this theory of
truth, I try to give examples to show its coherence with existing
information. I state that it is *extremely probable* to be true
(meaning it is likely that in all circumstances that can come up,
this statement will hold to be true) but I do not state that it is
*absolutely true* as that would be a contradiction.

Philosophy is primarily concerned with what is "absolutely true"
but it is practically indisputable that it has not *attained*
absolute truth, and that even if it has, we don't know about it.

While some truths are *practically* indisputable like: "I can know
something". Such truths are not *absolutely* indisputable. Even if
it is known that any disputes to the statement require the
knowledge of language, the concept of self, the concept of
knowledge, and the concept of the ability or inability to do
something therefore it is impossible to invalidate the statement.
Suppose a reality where whatever the "I" is, has been reduced to a
mindless drone which simply responds to external stimuli without
any higher processing or memory that happened to utter a dispute
to this statement like "I can't know something", is that statement
really false? It would actually be a pretty accurate description
of the mindless drone's circumstances.

Some may state that said knowledge and coherency is subjective and
differs from person to person, circumstance to circumstance
therefore there is no way to know for my argument to have any
meaning whatsoever. However that statement defeats itself as it
also necessarily must state that it has no meaning or possible
coherency at all.

In summary, absolute truth is logically possible but impractically
difficult to know, coherency as a method for evaluating greater
and lesser truths is both highly coherent itself and a much more
practical and coherent way of resolving philosophical differences
while preserving the existence of truths.
