---
title: On Free Will
author: LQR471814
date: 2025-06-04
categories:
- on...
tags:
- philosophy
---

The debate on whether free will exists rages on. However, the very
question on whether free will exists, like many other
philosophical questions is intentionally vague as to prompt
discussion on various related questions.

In this article, I would like to provide a compatibilistic
explanation for the two sides of the debate and hopefully put an
end to the philosophical conflict for those who only casually
dabble in philosophy like yours truly.

That said, what is more important than listening to my opinions is
understanding of the nuance behind different positions on this
question as well as the reckoning of the far-reaching implications
a society or culture's answer to this question has on its people.

To start, we should ask what does the question itself actually
ask?

### Determinism

Starting with those who do not believe in free will, the question
is interpreted as asking whether *"a human, who is made up of a
group of atoms, must act and evolve according to the laws of
physics."*

For there to exist free will for the determinist, there must exist
something *outside* the laws of physics that can affect the
*physical* world. It is the same as asserting that ghosts or
supernatural phenomenon actually exist and can affect the world.

For many physicists, scientists, and humans in the modern era,
such an assertion is preposterous. The modern laws of physics are
theories that have been iterated upon, proven, and applied in
peoples' lives over centuries

It then follows, that the true nature of free will must either be:

1. A natural phenomenon that cannot be detected or observed,
   proven or disproven.
2. A product of natural phenomenon, and thus, an illusion, since
   one is not truly "free" of the forces of physics.

To believe in option 1 is to distrust the very foundations of
modern society, to throw away one's trust that through science one
can come to truth. And so, for the determinist the truth must lie
in option 2.

Therefore, free will does not actually exist, everyone is simply a
product of their environment, their genetic structure, their
experiences, etc...

*Note: There exist other arguments against free will that do not
use physics or science, but this is often the most well-known
argument.*

### Non-determinism

For those who believe in free will, the question is interpreted in
a variety of ways.

For those who deal with the law, it asks: "Are individuals
responsible for their own actions? Should individuals be treated
as the ultimate cause for their own actions?"

For those who deal with ethics, it asks: "Do individuals have the
ability to make choices of right or wrong at all? Is it the person
that is right or wrong, or is it the system they are a part of
that motivated their action that is right or wrong?"

> It should be clear that the answer to this question has
> far-reaching implications for governance and politics.
>
> Ex. Communism, Conservativism vs. Liberalism, etc...

For those who believe in free will or find it useful as a concept,
to deny humans free will is to deny personal responsibility, or
to plunge into the depths of ethical nihilism. To welcome total
anarchy and allow anything, after all, humans are simply products
of their environment, everything that is done is what should have
been done, and what could not have been otherwise.

Therefore, free will must exist, peoples' actions are a result of
their own free will.

### Putting them together

After looking at both sides of the argument, like in many
philosophical debates, you tend to realize that the two sides are
talking about different things.

The determinists are talking about physics while the
non-determinists are talking about law and ethics. One talks about
the natural world, atoms, forces, and laws. While the other talks
about people and societies.

The two are talking about two different theories, two completely
different levels of analysis, it is quite obvious that they will
come to different answers.

That said, both sides do have truth to offer.

For the determinist, it is the idea that humans are not completely
detached from their environments. Contrary to the rationalist
ideal, the mind is not insulated from the world, but can be
affected by it. If I were to punch myself in the gut, no amount of
free will will prevent myself from feeling pain. The idea that we
can reliably predict human behavior is an integral part of our
society, economy, and politics. People are not gods who can will
themselves to be above the natural forces of the world.

For the non-determinist, it is the idea of the integral role
humans play in their environments. To reckon with a person's power
to change their environments, to change other peoples' situations
in unpredictable ways is to recognize their free will. To
understand that people can be given a rotten environment, but
still emerge successful is to recognize their free will. As such,
to account for the fact that we cannot so easily predict our
fellow humans' behavior, it is helpful to draft our rules and
regulations such that they are not dependent on any such
predictions.

Both truths are useful in our pursuit to understand the world,
through the lens of the physical, social, personal, and
philosophical.

